First of all, we're testing. One, two, three,
four. One, two, three, four. Did you get high-tech
equipment than that? Today, I have the pleasure of
chatting with Dan Fon Steele about his student
days. Dan, to begin with, someone who might listen
to this tape or read the transcription years from
now might not know your background, describe
growing up, where, what did your parents do, What
school did you go to? What did you do before you came
to A&M as a student? I actually was born in
Guadalupe County, Texas, in Marion, Texas, but at
five we moved over to Bexar County, a place called
Converse, Texas, very close to San Antonio, and I
grew up on a very small farm, about 130 acres, when I
still can remember switching from horses and
mules to tractor, and it was very happy to learn how
to drive the tractor. I always said my father, who
had only about a fourth grade education, was a
great psychologist. He made me feel that to let me
drive the tractor was about the greatest thing he
could ever do for me. And I begged and pleaded. At
ten, I was already putting in full days on that
tractor and I could see him laughing in his fist and
I'd argue. I wouldn't even want to come home for
meals. I loved to drive that tractor. I guess the
thing that influenced me more than anything else
to come to Texas A&M was the role model I had with the
county extension agent. A fellow named H.A.
Fitzhugh was a young county agent out of A&M. He
just fit my model of everything what a good man
should be and these were the depression days and he
really, really helped our family. The extension
service really helped our family. We were
basically a cotton producing farm. With those few
acres, you know, we didn't get rich very easily. Of
course, as I told my grandsons the other day who did
a similar kind of interview, I said we all were dirt
poor but we didn't think of ourselves as poor
because everybody else was in the same boat. And
the Extension Service came out. We were basically
dependent on the cotton crop and we grew some corn
for feed and some hay and that's about it. The
Extension Service had a program in those days that
was kind of a part of a national program to
diversify. So we got about 20 milk cows, we got some
hogs, we got chickens, and that actually pulled us
through. My dad developed an egg and butter route
in San Antonio where he served rich people. There
were some rich people in the Depression in the
Alamo Heights area and he'd give them the highest
quality butter and eggs and they'd pay double
prices for them. He went in once a week and
delivered these and I often went with him. That was
my first urban exposure.
I started with the 4-H program as early as nine
years old, as soon as I could get in. I had a couple of
sheep projects which didn't turn out too well.
Then I was lucky to get, I don't know if you've ever
heard of it, the Sears Foundation program. where
they gave kids, on the basis of an essay they wrote,
how they would handle this situation, would give
them pigs. The program was that there were eight
gilts, females, young females, and one boar given
out each year, and the idea was that the program
would be self-perpetuating because out of each
litter the following year, another eight boys
would get it, but one person would get the boar. and
I got the bore that came from the Texas Air Crosser
Experiment Station here at College Station,
Texas, a Duroc bore, and that was probably my
ticket to A&M because he started siring champions
at the, I didn't have them, other people had them,
but he started siring winners at the Houston Life
Doc Show, about three or four years running. and I
worked very closely with the county agent and that
in those days the tradition was you'd either a pig
or five dollars for service and after the boar got a
reputation we couldn't handle all the business. I
mean you can only use a boar so much. And the county
agent said, you need to double your price to cut
down. Well, that really attracted, you know, they
said it really had something. So it had, that had a
lot to do, I would not have been able to go to A&M if I
had not been in the forage program. And it
particularly hit it lucky with this animal who
lived, I guess the only animal, a pig or a hog that I
ever knew died of old age. He was six years old and he
weighed 1,100 pounds, if you can imagine that. And
that was in, what we call breeding condition. He
was not fat. He was 1,100 pounds. But his heart gave
out at six years old. I've read somewhere nobody
ever knows how old a pig gets because we don't let
them reach maturity and die of old age. But anyway,
the Extension Service did a lot of other things for
our program. They had mattress programs where
surplus cotton was used to make homemade
mattresses. They had a lot of programs to preserve
your own food, have gardens, and all of it. I got
pretty committed to wanting to emulate and get,
and I thought this was really where you could make a
contribution in the world because I really
admired the extent of the county agents himself
and the programs they did. But as I said, we were
extremely poor at that time. We were still renting
our property, which meant we had to give up a third
every year to the landowner, tried desperately to
want to buy it and couldn't because you had to have a
down payment. Anyway, There was no way I could have
gone to college
without the 4-H experience and the commitment I
got through seeing the good work that the
Extension Service did. Then as I went to school, I
went to a rural school at Converse, Texas. It was a
three-room school. where there were three grades
grouped together, first, second, and third
grade, and fourth, fifth, and sixth, and seventh
through the tenth, I guess it was, had an old
disciplinarian German principal who was a
disciplinarian from the word go, and he taught the
top grades except for English, taught all the
subjects except for English and the lower grades
that were taught to women that came out of San
Antonio. Anyway, when it came time to, it did not
have a complete program. When it came time to
graduate, I had to go a year and a half to San Antonio
to in order to get my degree. And my folks, since I
was the only son, I had one older sister, I guess my
folks aspired to my taking over the farm someday.
But I still had this other ambition. And they
really couldn't help me a great deal. But I did have
considerable savings that I did from my eight
years of 4-H projects and so forth. And I very
strongly wanted to. to come to Texas A&M because I
thought that was the only route you could become a
county agent in. My parents were not
unsupportive. They said, why don't you go to
junior college first and see how you like and
everything. I said, no, I didn't know what I was
getting into. Nobody else in the community had
ever gone to Texas A&M. If I probably had known at
that time what I faced, I might have had second
thoughts. But anyway, I guess one of the reasons I
stuck it out was because it was my decision. You
know, many, many times the first year I was ready to
quit, but I said, you know, everybody knows. Had
you come to visit before you came up to enroll?
Never. What I knew was just one or two people I'd run
into that, you know, told us, told me about A&M. I
got all the literature I could get my hands on. If I
could find somebody I'd talk about it, but I really
was not prepared. I was extremely naive for... So
this is the fall of In the fall of 45, I made the
decision to come here and things were, just after
the war, switching here. Describe how you got here
on that trip and what did you bring in the way of
belongings? At that time, we got very strong
messages. Do not let your parents bring you, which
is quite at odds. In fact, I looked for this.
There's a YMCA bulletin, you need to find that,
that had You know, stuff that had the yells, the
songs, and tips, you know, what to do and what not to
do. And the strongest thing was do not let your
parents bring you. I guess the notion was if you ran
into what you're going to run into, you'd probably
come right back home with, you know, come by bus or
come by train and bring one trunk of belongings.
And I got myself a footlocker from somewhere. I
think when my brother-in-law came back from the
military, army footlocker, that was it. Bus or
train? I came by bus, Kerrville bus from San
Antonio. Rode the bus. It took about seven hours.
Where did it let you off? Do you remember? Well, I
know I had a change in Hearn. Came, I guess, at
Northgate somewhere. I'm not sure. I can't
remember. And what did you have in that
footlocker? My worldly possessions. No, but like
there wasn't much clothing out there. No, no. I
expected to get clothing here. That was one of the
attractions of going to A&M, that they'd furnish
you... I think a couple of uniforms and shoes and
things like that. I got my basic underwear and I
guess a few books and stuff like that. Describe
finding your way to whatever dorm you were going to
be in. Well, I remember I came in September of 1945.
The university had been on a trimester system, as
you may remember. During the war, it was an
accelerated program and they were just switching
back to the semester program. And I don't know
where the bus, I think the bus let me off at North
Gate. And there was a place there where there were
upperclassmen to meet you. And that first
encounter was enough to want to get back on the bus
and go home because they started screaming and
yelling at you. But they somehow organized us. And
I was assigned to F Company Infantry in dorm six on
the top floor. In what was then called the New Dorm
area. The New Dorm. Those were the New Dorms. They
had been built, I guess, in the 30s, right? And you
know the situation. I was on the top floor, and
surprisingly, you may know this person. My
roommate was Benton Story. My, my. And I guess
Benton was a godsend to me because I guess the
furthest I'd ever been from home before that had
been through maybe Dallas, Houston, Corpus
Christi, never out of state. and I was certainly
naive, but I think Benton was even more naive, and
he was strictly here for academics. All of the core
bull, as we call it, didn't go over well with him,
but he tolerated, but I guess I often looked at, you
know, I thought I was having a hard time, but I think
he was even having a harder time, and that kept me
going, but it was quite a cultural shock. I mean,
there's no question about it. I mean, the
upperclassmen you know, just screaming at you all
the time. I went to F Company, which turned out
later to be a company so bad they had to, for hazing
and so forth, they had to dissolve it. Did it have a
nickname? Not that I can remember, but things got
so bad. One of the problems with the Corps in those
days was that they had a lot of upperclassmen who
were supercharged. Do you know that word? They
were, even though they were academically
qualified, sophomores and juniors. They were
given junior and senior status so they'd be a
non-commissioned and an officer nucleus to run
the companies. And some of those guys were just a
year or two older than we were and I think they were
not as mature as they were later on when you had 21
and 22 year old seniors who had more maturity.
These guys were 17, 18 years old. I was 17, they were
just not a lot older. But they were extremely
rough, no question about it. And there weren't any
veterans back yet in the fall of 45? They were
coming, yes, in the classes, they were coming in.
Oh, really? Yeah, and that was the other shock part
of it because they were in the classes already.
They had started putting in these temporary
housing right here in the north part, the old
barracks type of thing, made classrooms out of
them. And most of the classes had about 50%
veterans already. The other thing that was
different at that time, the philosophy, at least
in agriculture, I can't speak for the other
colleges, was that they didn't expect you to
finish then. That they wanted you to get something
practical when you got out, and if you didn't come
back, you'd have that. So basically, instead of
taking the foundation courses the first year, we
took all the, what I call, applied courses.
Horticulture, agronomy, animals. We had no
chemistry or botany, except what we had in high
school. But they gave us all of these courses,
which were second year courses, as I say, animal
science, agronomy, the basic courses,
horticulture, entomology, I guess agricultural
economics. All of those courses were taught the
first year. And then the second year, if they knew
we were going to stay, then we went back and picked
up the chemistry and the botany and biology, all of
that. Anyway, that made it rough because you were,
I mean, the courses had been taught with having,
you know, some foundation. Do you remember going
through a registration? Yes, I remember being
shocked at the tremendous heat down here,
standing in hours, and it was very disorganized.
Where was it held? Sabisa. In Sabisa. But you had to
stand outside in lines and you had to get in line for
everything. I mean, every course you signed up
for, you had a, the professor was sitting there and
You know, he'd say whether he'd take you or not, and
you had to work out your schedule, and all that was
new to me, and you know, just finding your way
around was pretty traumatic. But, you know, I
guess we kind of leaned on each other. But it took
about a full day to register in those days, and I
mean, it was just one line after another. Do you
remember anyone giving you advice? Was there a
faculty member? Yes, I was, I can't remember the
gentleman's name, but we were assigned advisors.
I was assigned a professor in agricultural
engineering, although I was not intending to go in
engineering. I want to say McGuire, but that's not
true. I didn't work with him very much, but he did
help me, advise me, and he was available to me.
I was very committed to the academic program
myself, and I guess I felt the core somewhat
interfering with that. What did you think your
major was going to be? I probably was leaning to
animal science then but we didn't have to commit
because I was this was just general agriculture
the first two years but I was I guess aiming for
animal science and thought maybe I'd change later
on but most of my earlier background in 4-H had been
animal science so of course they called it animal
husbandry in those days got a lot of jokes, you
know, animal husband type of thing, but that's
what it was called in those days. Describe the
routine of the sophomores and others in the Corps
kind of get you freshmen into shape. Well, at that
time, I guess it's pretty well the seniors,
although I presume they gave the orders, were
pretty aloof from the day-to-day activities, and
to some extent the juniors. The sophomores were
the bane of our existence they were constantly
screaming at us and as you know in those days you
were you couldn't hide as a freshman you had a fish
stripe on white stripe on your left collar and a
short haircut and you you couldn't I mean it was not
just the ones in your unit anywhere on the campus
you ran into sophomores you had to go through the
routine of introducing yourself and all of that
and you know having you remember the I guess to this
day I can remember that you could never say no. You
heard that one over. You would never say no. I don't
know if I can still remember that. You'd have to
say, sir, I do not know the answer. I hesitate to
articulate for fear of deviating from the two
paths of rectitude. And it went on and on. But you
couldn't say no. But it was rough. It was really,
really rough. And they did a lot of paddling. And I
really resented that. I mean, I swore at that point
I would never paddle when I was an operator, and I
never did. I avoided it. I mean, I was put in
situation, I just refused to do it. I was so put out
by that type of punishment. But in that particular
company, and it probably was all around, there was
a lot of hazing, which included paddling. There's
another reason. I'm Dan today instead of Daniel.
Have you heard about beating off your handle?
Well, at the end of the year, you're they beat off
your handle which was your name and we anticipated
that and each it was uh each letter uh fish f i each
letter was paddled and the i's were dotted and the
e's and l's were looped and it was a lot better to be
dan than daniel because there were a lot of loops
and dots and that in fact at the end of my freshman
year i was they all the sophomores took a great
pleasure into eliminating your handle, as they
called it, fish font steel, and I really got beat.
In fact, to this day, I'm embarrassed For some
reason, the first week I was home, my mother saw my
rear end when I was sleeping one night, and she just
broke down and cried. I mean, it was black and blue.
But at least that year was behind me. But the thing
was, even as a sophomore, you could be beaten, but
not as much. But as I said, when I went on, I resolved
that was just too inhumane. And of course, the
other bad aspect of the Corps was the lack of sleep.
You were just constantly harassed. You know,
they'd call you out for midnight this and midnight
that and so forth. And some, you know, you finally
learn your way how to avoid situations. And one of
the best things to do was to get a job, get away from
this. And I, you know, and I had to work. I mean, I
kept, I had, you know, several hundred dollars
saved up. And I kept accurate books, and you'll be
surprised to know that my whole first year
including everything, tuition, room and board,
the whole works, books and everything cost me
about $500. And did you, or had you earned... I had
that money available. My parents could not help me
as such. It turned out later on, you know, they got a
little better off during the war. And of course, as
my wife and I are very fair-minded with the
children, my sister didn't have the opportunity
to go to college. So we worked out a deal. The
subsequent summers, I would stay at home and farm,
and they'd give me room and board, and I'd earn what
a hired man would earn. And that helped take me over
from year to year. But I worked every month except
the first month that I came here. Somehow or
another, wherever I could find jobs, I started
out, I think, in the horticulture department. I
later on worked in the poultry department and
things like that. The money, that was 25 cents an
hour. Minimum, that's what they paid students in
those days. And it was rough. I guess one thing
that, well, they had two incentives in those days.
Excuse me. I wonder if I get some water. We're going
to just stop this? Describe the, physically, the
room and what was in it that you and your fish old
lady shared. Well, let me get off that, we've left
on another thought, let me finish it. There were
two big incentives for Corps members to do well
academically and I, to this day, I think it's still
a good program. At that time, I think it was an old
policy at A&M, if you made an A or B, had an A or B
average and were in the top quarter of your class,
you didn't have to take finance. And that was a real
incentive to do well. And I always, I was the type of
student, I loved to, or I preferred to study in
bursts, you know, an hour or so at a time and I
couldn't, you know, and then I'd want to do
something else. And that was a big incentive to,
uh, Even if you didn't exempt all of them, if you
exempted two or three, that gave you more time to
study for the others. And I thought it was a real
incentive. The other even bigger incentive for
freshmen was that one thing that the core did was
good about the core. I think, particularly for
freshmen who haven't really learned to study and
get organized, is that they enforce what they call
CQ. from seven to eleven you were expected to be at
your desk studying and you could only go to the
bathroom and anything else you had to have an
excuse or something of that kind and it was
enforced the doors had to be open sophomores
patrolled with a board in their hand up and down the
hall you had to have your head in your books well
four hours of sitting at your desk is not to me the
most conducive way to learn I mean I think it's good
to you have to walk around a little and sometimes
shift around and so forth But anyway, and I guess it
was good for a lot of the incoming freshmen because
a lot of them hadn't learned to study. And the other
policy they had, if you were on the dean's list, the
last half of the semester after midterm, you could
go to bed at 10 o'clock. And sleep was the most
precious thing for a freshman at those days when
being in the corps because you got up early and
everything. OK, well, the other thing I was going
to say, I suppose most people have to go through
kind of a crisis in learning how to study, and I
probably had done that before I got here, in
contrast to a lot of my peers, because when I
switched from rural school to high school, in San
Antonio. That was my biggest, that was even a
bigger cultural shock than coming to A&M, but I
really, really had to learn to study and they threw
me into physics and a lot of these courses and I
pretty well learned And I think there is, you know,
something, everybody has to work it out for
themselves, but I pretty well had done that before
I got here. Now, who'd you stay with in San Antonio
when you were... Well, I commuted. Oh. I commuted.
Well, I did stay for a while during the bad
wintertime, if you want to go back to that. It's an
unbelievable saga. I lived three miles from the
school, the rural school, or the highway. Mm-hmm.
And in those days, during the war, they had
instigated bus runs from San Antonio to Randolph
Field, Texas for the workers. They had a lot of
civilian workers, and the buses ran early in the
morning. And I would bike in good weather, but my
folks would take me most times. I had to catch the
615 bus in the morning after getting there. ride
that bus, which took about an hour to get into San
Antonio. I remember they let me off at Joski's. And
then I had to, you could either take a bus transfer
or just walk five or six blocks down to St. Mary's
Street and then take another city bus. And so I'd
get there by eight o'clock. And then I'd have the
same routine coming back. It got so bad in the
winter of 40, that was still during the war, 44 and
45, my friends, my parents had some good friends
sergeant and his wife who lived at Fort Sam Houston
and I spent the winter months with them like
January, February, March or something and then
just rode the city bus from there because it was
grueling with the even got daylight saving time
for the first time in those days and I didn't get
light till 8 o'clock so that helped out but I
basically commuted and I did most of my studying in
route I mean I had lots of time with sitting on that
bus back and forth and it cost very little But
that's how I went to high school. Anyway, if you
want to come back to the... Yeah, describe the room
that you and... It was pretty spartan. You've seen
them, I'm sure, or I don't know if you have. The
rooms were quite small. They had one double deck
bed on one side. How did you all decide who got the
top deck? I have no idea. Probably flipped or
something. I have no idea. Uh, we each had a desk
with one bookshelf in each corner, the outside
corner, and we each had a closet, and we each had a, I
mean, we didn't have, there was a lavatory in the
room, a sink, as we called it, lavatory. And that
was it. No radio. I don't think, no, as freshmen
weren't allowed radios, I'm pretty sure. I think
it was an upper class. There were a lot of
privileges that you got as you, and they were meted
out as you got in, but. No rug. No rug, no. No
curtains. No curtain, not for freshmen, no.
Describe the routine of a typical weekday. What
time did you all get up? What did you do? When? I'm
not sure I can tell you the exact time. We got up
pretty early because we marched to breakfast. We
marched to every meal as a company. The roll call
was held just, I mean, it was, you know, completely
military. I think one of the sophomores. The
sophomores were the corporals, the enforcers and
so forth, and the juniors were the sergeants, and
the seniors were the officers. But somebody come
through hollering or whistling, you know, it's
time to get up. And everybody got up. And you had a
communal bathroom that everybody used, showers
and commodes. You had your lavatory in your room.
and you know we just got ready for the day and of
course we had to be presentable shoes had to be
perfectly shined starched ironed uniform
everything had to be perfect before we left the
room it had to be perfect I mean no dust no anything
the old thing you know the coin test on the bed had to
be made up so tight that the coin would bounce and
that was all Aggies should be good husbands
because they really learn how to how to take care of
it. Everything had to be perfect. Your room was
always subject to inspection. And then at another
whistle or something, you fell out, as they called
it, and you'd organize on those very sidewalks in
the interior part of the new dormitory area, as
they called it then, those twelve dormitories.
You'd fall into companies by rank, I mean, you
know, And you'd march to Duncan Hall and have your
breakfast. Everything was family style in those
days, which was nice because you got plenty to eat.
As a farm boy, what was your impression of the food
in Duncan? Well, I was happy with it. Of course, my
mother was a good cook. The only thing I guess I
disliked was we always accused the University
of... killing their overage sheep. And I've
learned to like lamb, but I didn't like mutton
because you could smell it cooking way out there.
But they had some very good food. They had lots of, I
mean, there was plenty of it. I mean, it was good,
wholesome food. There's no question about that.
And you sat at the tables at a brace. As freshmen,
you sat straight up. And you were in the middle, and
there was a senior or junior or something. And they
had to be fed first and everything. But you sat at a
brace. And anyway, getting back, you marched in in
battalions and just like your regular formation.
And you had your assigned table. And the freshmen
had to do it. Waiters brought the initial food. I
think if the seniors or whoever, the
upperclassmen sitting at your table wanted
something else, you were sent, maybe sent back to
get something. But the food was certainly
adequate and wholesome. There's no question
about it. But a lot of Aggies complained about it.
And I guess because I was so cheap, I guess that was
the word, I had to be economical because of that. I
would never miss a meal there because my
philosophy was I paid for the darn thing. But on
Sunday mornings, I guess they were so glad to sleep
in, a lot of Aggies slept in and got their own
breakfast later on or bought it, but I couldn't
afford that. There were only a handful of people
that would go in on Sunday mornings. But all the
other, even at noon then, you'd still start
marching in again. But they did not have a march in
on Sunday morning. And that happened three times a
day. You had a formation, you fell in into your
company ranks, and you marched to the mess hall,
sat at the same table, And then you went back on your
own, and volunteer classes or whatever else you
had to do. And in the evening, the same way. Then the
period between five and six was a rough period for
freshmen. But they did have a lot of intramural
athletics where it was organized, where you'd
play football out in the drill field or whatever
was available. And then you marched to mess, and
they and I said between 7 and 11 was CQ and nothing
was supposed to happen. Nothing was supposed to
happen after that either but it varied by
companies and I said we had a particularly
diabolical unit it seemed like maybe just seemed
like that to me but it was so bad that they did as I
said disband the unit because the things got out of
hand in the end of the semester and reassigned us to
other other, other units after the first
semester. That first semester, you remember how
many hours you took? I always took a heavy load. In
fact, you won't believe this, I took as high as 24
hours. Sure. And, uh. But at the first, I think
about 17 or 18 hours. What did you, where did you
find a hideaway? A place? The library.